.TH ponscr 6
.
.SH NAME
ponscr \- the Ponscripter novel-game interpreter
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ponscr
.RI [ OPTIONS ]\ [ script-path ]
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.
This manpage documents the
.BR ponscr
command itself.
.
For an overview of NScripter-family interpreter operation and details
of how Ponscripter differs from other implementations, see
.BR ponscripter (7).
.PP
.BR ponscr
should be invoked in one of two ways: either from within a game
directory, or from an arbitrary location with a game directory
specified as an option.
.PP
On Unix-like operating systems other than Mac OS X, it is recommended
that you use the second option.
.
Game packagers will ideally provide wrapper scripts that launch
.BR ponscr
indirectly, so users will not have to know anything about the
underlying interpreter.
.PP
On Mac OS X, the recommended approach is to create an application
bundle containing a Ponscripter binary and the game data in the
bundle's Resources directory; things will then \*(lqjust work\*(rq.
.PP
On Microsoft Windows, the simplest approach is to store a Ponscripter
binary in the game directory.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.
Up to two positional options may be provided.
.
If two are provided, the first is given an implicit
.BR \-r ,
and the second an implicit
.BR \-s .
If only one is provided, and there has already been a
.BR \-r
option, then it is given an implicit
.BR \-s ;
otherwise it is given an implicit
.BR \-r ,
unless it contains a / character, in which case it is divided into a
filename and a path, with the path given an implicit
.BR \-r
and the filename an implicit
.BR \-s .
In both cases, these assignments are overridden by any explicit
.BR \-r \ or \ \-s
options.
.
.PP
(Executive summary:
.BR ponscr
will probably do what you want unless you ask for something
ambiguous.)
.
.PP
The following named options are recognised by
.BR ponscr ,
in additional to the standard
.BR \-\-help " and " \-\-version
flags which should need no further introduction:
.
.TP
.BI \-r " path\fR,\fP " \-\-root \ path
Execute the game located at
.IR path .
.IP
If this option is not specified, any positional parameter will be
used; otherwise the default behaviour on most platforms is to look for
a game in the current working directory.
.
.TP
.BI \-s " file\fR,\fP " \-\-script \ file
Use the script named
.IR file .
If a path is given, it is interpreted relative to the current working
directory; if no path is given, the file is sought in the root path
(determined as described above).
.
.IP
If this option is not provided at all, a script file is sought
automatically in the root path.
.
The filenames searched for, and their corresponding formats, are
described in
.BR ponscripter (7).
The same naming conventions are observed if this option is used,
except that multipart scripts cannot currently be loaded this way, and
unobfuscated scripts may have non-numeric names.
.
.TP
.BI \-\-save \ path
Set the path to use for saved data.
.IP
This option should not normally be used; a sensible default will be
generated.
.
On most Unix-like platforms, saved games will be stored in
.BI ~/. GAME
(where GAME is the name of the game being played).
.
On Mac OS X, 
.BI ~/Library/Preferences/ GAME
is used instead.
.
Under Microsoft Windows, data is stored in
.BI %COMMON_APPDATA%\e GAME\fR.
.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-debug
Enable debugging output.
.
Repeating this option may increase the verbosity even further.
.
.TP
.BI \-\-cdaudio
Use CD audio, if available.
(TODO: explain.)
.
.TP
.BI \-\-cdnumber \ number
Choose the CD-ROM drive number.
(TODO: explain.)
.
.TP
.BI \-\-registry \ file
Ponscripter simulates NScripter's Windows registry access commands by
reading from a fixed text file.
.
This option is used to specify that file.
.IP
(This applies even on Microsoft Windows; real registry access is not
supported, period.)
.
.TP
.BI \-\-dll \ file
Ponscripter simulates access to arbitrary NScripter DLL extensions by
reading predefined function results from a fixed text file.
.
This is enough to make games
.IR work ,
though not enough to make them work properly.
.
Proper support for some extensions may be built into Ponscripter
itself.
.IP
(This applies even on Microsoft Windows; real DLL extensions are not
supported, period.)
.
.TP
.BI \-\-fullscreen
Force Ponscripter to start in fullscreen mode.
.
.TP
.BI \-\-window
Force Ponscripter to start in windowed mode.
.
.TP
.BI \-\-force\-button\-shortcut
Disables four NScripter commands:
.BR spclclk ", " getenter ", " getcursor ", and " useescspc .
.IP
(This option was inherited from ONScripter; the reason for it is lost
in the mists of time.)
.
.TP
.BI \-\-force\-png\-alpha
Always use alpha channels for PNG transparency, even if an image looks
as though it might contain an NScripter-style mask.
.
See NOTES.
.
.TP
.BI \-\-force\-png\-nscmask
Always use NScripter-style masks for PNG transparency, even if an
image contains an alpha channel.
.
See NOTES.
.
.TP
.BI \-\-enable\-wheeldown\-advance
Allow mouse-wheel-down events to advance text.
.
.TP
.BI \-\-disable\-rescale
This is an ONScripter option that I've never used. (TODO: what does it
do?)
.
.TP
.BI \-\-key\-exe \ file
Specify key file to use to read obfuscated
.BR nscript.___
files and their accompanying archives.
.
This option is provided only for use with legacy games; native
Ponscripter games cannot be obfuscated with this method.
.
.TP
.BI \-\-edit
This is an ONScripter option that I've never used. (TODO: what does it
do?)
.
.SH BUGS
.
On Microsoft Windows, all output to stdout and stderr is stored in
files in the
.B %COMMON_APPDATA%\ePonscripter
directory, which are clobbered each time the program is launched and
deleted upon termination if empty.
.
Output is never printed to the console, even if the interpreter was
launched from the command line, and the behaviour if multiple
instances are launched at the same time is undefined.
.PP
Most fatal error messages are printed to stderr, which for 99% of
users means the interpreter dies silently with no hint as to the
cause.
.
They should be displayed with some kind of popup dialog; preferably a
platform-native one, where feasible.
.PP
The entire design of this interpreter is arguably a bug.
.
.SH NOTES
.
.SS PNG transparency
.
The behaviour of PNG images is not well-defined, since NScripter does
not support them directly.
.
Historically, some interpreters/plugins have expected them to use
alpha channels for transparency, while others have expected them to
use NScripter-style masks like BMP files do (i.e. the bitmap is double
width, with the left-hand side being the full-colour image, and the
right-hand side being a greyscale mask).
.PP
By default, Ponscripter uses a heuristic approach: if a PNG has an
alpha channel that is not completely opaque, that is used, otherwise
an NScripter-style mask is used if present.
.
If this fails to work for some images, and you cannot fix the images
in question directly, then you can use the \-\-force\-png\-alpha or
\-\-force\-png\-nscmask options to overrule the automatic detection.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.
.BR ponscripter (7)
.PP
.BR "NScripter documentation" ,
for a description of the basic operation of NScripter-style games and
documentation of most of the functionality supported.  Most NScripter
references are only available in Japanese, but there is some
English-language documentation at
.IR http://nscripter.insani.org .
